Title: anotherday.co.uk
template: album
theme: look

## Guardian


Dave Simpson



It's taken 35 years for Bunyan to follow up her revered 1970 debut Just
Another Diamond Day. In her absence, Bunyan has developed superfans
including Devendra Banhart, Joanna Newsom and electronic man Max Richter,
who contribute acoustic guitar, harp and, comparatively raucously, piano to
this collection of stunningly simple songs. In Wayward, Bunyan muses how she
once wanted to be armed with a suitcase, "the one with road dust on my
shoes." But if there's a slight wistfulness, she seems to have found equal
potency in anonymous rural escape. With her voice so ethereal and distant
it's virtually medieval, Lookaftering as is much 1570 as 1970. Her hushed,
magical songs conjure up not so much "a world without end", but one without
time at all.


******************

## BBC


Chris Long



Vashti Bunyan's story is possibly the most romantic that music has ever
known. After being ejected from her mid-60s art school for being unable to
choose between songs and painting, she was discovered by Stones svengali
Andrew Loog Oldham and looked set to become a star.



However, the recordings she made never surfaced. Disenchanted with the
industry, she packed her few belongings onto a cart and made an epic
horse-drawn journey north to Donovan's colony on the Isle of Skye. Two years
later, she arrived to find that the Scottish Dylan had gone, leaving her
with just the collection of songs she had created en route.



Those songs, thanks in no small part to the Incredible String Band and
Fairport Convention, made up her debut album, Just Another Diamond Day, a
twinkling collection of other-worldy folk released with little fanfare in
1970. After that, Bunyan vanished. So legendary is that self-exile that Mark
Radcliffe used it in his recent book, Northern Sky, as metaphor for the
ultimate get-away-from-it-all disappearing act.



With all that in mind, no-one ever expected this, her follow-up, a mere 35
years later. Its the kind of gap that makes Kate Bush and The Stone Roses
look like hard workers. A web search a few years back revealed to Vashti
that her debut had become something of a lost gem, a cult classic passed
from collector to collector, and it spurred her to develop Lookaftering.



It is a worthy successor. Rather than being a simple echo of her
masterpiece, Lookaftering is distinct in its own beauty, shimmering with her
soporific tones and floating on the gentle wonder of her melodies.



As with Just Another Diamond Day, Bunyan has chosen to work with some of the
finest and most challenging musicians around. Where before Dave Swarbrick
and Robin Williamson gave her accompaniment, now it is the turn of Joanna
Newsom, Devendra Banhart and Adem to offer their talents in support.



Her songwriting has developed, if only in the lengthening of her
compositions, but none of her tender charm has diminished in those years of
absence. Her topics are, as ever, drawn from her own life, taking in
motherhood, the loss of a brother, the loss of freedom and the constraints
of domesticity along the way. That honesty only adds to the lulling intimacy
her voice already offers and makes the album title, a personalised word that
means taking care of someone, seem like the most perfect description
possible.



Lookaftering would have been a remarkable album even without Bunyan's story
to accompany it. The fact that it is the work of a singer whose brilliance
was thought long-lost to the world makes it an instant classic.


******************

## All Music Guide


Thom Jurek



Much has been made of Vashti Bunyan's 1969 unheard-at-the-time Just Another
Diamond Day. Produced by Joe Boyd, it featured the singer and songwriter
backed by a small string quartet. Discouraged by the sleazy ethics of the
music biz, she retired and concentrated on raising a family, gardening, and
other productive matters. The set was re-released on CD in 2000, and has
been rightfully heralded as a classic by virtually everyone who has heard
it. Sought out, she re-entered the arena, worked and collaborated with
Devendra Banhart and Simon Raymonde, and was the featured vocalist on Animal
Collective's fine Prospect Hummer EP. Thirty-six years later, Lookaftering,
Bunyan's second album, was released by Fat Cat. Produced by post-classical
composer and atmosphere impresario Max Richter &mdash; who co-arranged the set
with Bunyan &mdash; it features many of her collaborators, including Banhart,
Joanna Newsome, Adem, Adam Price, Robert Kirby (who arranged the strings on
her first record as well as Nick Drake's albums), Otto Hauser, and Kevin
Barker (Espers/Currituck County). This is not just some neo-acid folk
gathering of the stars, however. Bunyan's voice and songs are always center
stage, and Richter's production is always subtle, creating suitable,
unintrusive backdrops for that magical sound that comes from her mouth to
slip from the ether into sound. There is a slight bit of quavering in her
grain now, but it's beautiful as ever. Where Just Another Diamond Day
concentrated on living an idyllic life as a part of nature and creation
itself, Lookaftering is a tale of doing just that, looking after children,
lovers, friends, surroundings, and the changes in life like living and
dying. Her melodies are delicate, inviting, and delicate without the least
bit of twee posturing. Richter's restraint in adding the right touch of
piano and glockenspiel here, the precise use of recorders there, and
Newsome's harp playing all slip and shimmer in the backdrop as Bunyan's
voice and fingerpicked guitar walk softly through her songs. On "Wayward"
she sings, "Didn't want to be the one, the one who's left behind/While the
other one goes out to life and comes back home to find me...I wanted to be
the one with road dust on my boots/And a single silver earring and a
suitcase full of notes/And a band of wayward children with their fathers
left behind," but in either sense she finds "world without ending." There's
no regret in these songs, just the acceptance of life on its own terms, and
the magic found therein. Lookaftering is indescribably beautiful, whether
the setting is a Fender Rhodes or harp and dulcimer such as on "If I Were,"
kissed by sparse strings, or the recorders and guitars that frame her voice
in their center, singing about the process of living, asking questions, and
being content to live in between. Lookaftering is a gorgeously considered,
stunningly and sensitively crafted album by an artist who is truly outside
of all fashion, all time, and even space. Without the technological
trappings, this album, timeless and spaceless as it is, could have been made
300 years ago, but that it was made in the 21st century blesses you even
more. It's simply unlike anything else out there &mdash; except perhaps Just
Another Diamond Day. What a welcome return. Though her collaborators dream
of making recordings this pure, full of whispery strangeness, and
unselfconscious charm, Bunyan is as singular and out-of-the-box an artist as
there is. Welcome back.


******************

## Dusted


Michael Crumsho




Released to little fanfare or acclaim in 1970, Just Another Diamond Day was
already the young Vashti Bunyan's second go-round at making a career out of
music. But much like her earlier forays into the rock world (courtesy of a
Jagger/Richards penned debut single for Decca called "Some Things Just Stick
in Your Mind"), her tenure as a member of Joe Boyd's famed stable of folk
musicians wasn't made to last. Instead, she drifted away to Ireland and
spent the bulk of the next 30 years focusing on raising a family.



Although it barely resonated at the time, Bunyan's debut spent the next
three decades slowly gathering steam, eventually emerging as a cult
collector's item. Around the turn of the new century, a whole host of
younger musicians began paying their respects to her wispy folk;
collaborations with the likes of Kieren Hebden, Devendra Banhart, and the
Animal Collective quickly followed. And now, some 35 years after the release
of her debut long-player comes Lookaftering, Bunyan's second album.



In addition to being cited as an influence by many of today's nascent
folkies, Bunyan's music has become a constant namecheck for many journalists
seeking to situate recent "freak folk" or "neo-folk" recordings in some
larger outsider pantheon. It's rare that such a mythos develops at all, let
alone for an artist who released one album and disappeared. In that sense,
Lookaftering has the daunting task of not only competing with contemporary
musicians, but also with Bunyan's own legacy.



So, let's set history aside for a moment because, honestly, comparing
Bunyan's latest to her debut isn&rsquo;t a fair fight. Lookaftering was produced
by Max Richter, the author of a pretty great "post-Classical" record called
The Blue Notebooks, and features guest appearances from Banhart, Joanna
Newsom, Adem, Mice Parade's Adam Pierce and Espers&rsquo; Kevin Barker and Otto
Hauser, among others. The guests form a talented support system for Bunyan's
breathy, ethereal voice.



As far as the songwriting goes, Lookaftering finds Bunyan in much the same
place she was 35 years ago, although her lyrical concerns tend obviously to
reflect more matriarchal experiences. For me, Bunyan's music has always been
about her iconic voice - beautiful and understated, possessing a remarkable
lack of self-consciousness and isolation that made listening to her music
feel like eavesdropping. In that sense, it seems like she's hardly missed a
beat.



Richter's production is airy and bright, giving Bunyan ample room to
breathe. There are electronic touches throughout the disc, such as the
backwards bells and delayed vocal chorus of the somber "Here Before," but
these are never anything less than tasteful, suitably updating Bunyan's
sound for a newer generation. And as stated before, the guests seem quite
content to blend in with the background - if you didn't see her name in the
notes, you'd probably never have guessed that the lithe harp phrases on
"Against the Sky" or "If I Were" came from the hands of Newsom. Richter
steps up to his task in fine form, sharing the arrangement credits with
Bunyan herself. As such, tracks like "Same But Different" approach baroque
figures with cascading strings that never sound out of place.



Some find the mere prospect of this album troubling. After all, why mess
with a clean track record after all these years? Undoubtedly, I can envision
a few cynical bastards pegging this album as a little too adult contempo, as
it lacks the sweet haze of Joe Boyd's earlier production. But that misses
the point entirely. Although I'm sure we all wish for it, those of us
without a lifelong legacy are in the fortunate position of never having to
compare each and every creative impulse we pursue with things that we have
already accomplished. The prospect of always having everything we do
measured against one moment in our lives would be enough to make the weaker
amongst us never leave the house. That Vashti Bunyan had the courage to step
out of seclusion and follow up her classic debut is admirable. That she was
able to do so with an excellent batch of songs is a joy to behold, pure and
simple.


******************

## Pitchfork


Matthew Murphy



It's been 35 years since the release of UK folk singer Vashti Bunyan's solo
debut Just Another Diamond Day, which translates to roughly 240 years in
music industry terms. And now, with the release of her second album
Lookaftering, Bunyan has completed a comeback more reminiscent of pre-war
country blues artists like Dock Boggs or Bukka White, whose performing and
recording careers were resurrected during the 1960s folk revival, rather
than anyone from the pop/rock era. Like those old folk and bluesmen, Bunyan
returns to a musical landscape that's been unrecognizably altered. But
unlike the later recordings of those performers-- which consisted primarily
of reworking their older material-- Lookaftering represents the full-fledged
reawakening of a still-vital talent, ready to cast aside her decades-long
artistic hibernation and re-ignite her creative fires.



At that time, after the small initial pressing of Diamond Day failed to find
an audience, a disheartened Bunyan left the city and music behind, packing
her wagon to quietly raise children and animals in the Scottish Borders and
rural Ireland. In the meantime, however, her album slowly built a reputation
as a lost classic. So when Diamond Day was reissued in Britain to great
acclaim in 2000, Bunyan commenced her gradual return to the spotlight. Since
then she's made cameo appearances on albums by such fans as Devendra Banhart
and Piano Magic, and earlier this year partnered with Animal Collective on
the charming Prospect Hummer EP.



On Lookaftering, it comes as a relief to hear not only how pristine Bunyan's
delicate vocals remain but that she has retained her understated abilities
as a songwriter, despite going decades without picking up a guitar. Taking
its title from a self-invented word that refers to taking care of something
or someone-- as well as to the process of looking back on the past--
Lookaftering deftly covers both these themes in ample measure. In many
regards, this collection seems a wistful, measured reflection upon the
long-ago daydreams of Diamond Day and the sweet sadness of all that goes by,
while managing to retain the same tranquil, out-of-time intimacy that has
allowed her debut to age so gracefully.



Lookaftering also features tasteful instrumental contributions from such
guests as Banhart, Joanna Newsom, and Mice Parade's Adam Pierce, but
Bunyan's most crucial collaborator proves to be producer Max Richter.
Throughout the album, Richter's impeccable orchestrations of piano, strings,
and woodwinds (co-arranged by Bunyan) masterfully echo Joe Boyd's classic
work with Nick Drake, Fairport Convention, and on Diamond Day; as well as
Larry Fallon's chamber-folk arrangements on Nico's Chelsea Girl. As with
Diamond Day, this careful balance is critical to the album's success, since
Vashti's feathery, near-whispered vocals could be easily capsized by a
heavy-handed production.



"Indifference is the coldest hand/ It is the wave that clears the sand,"
sings Bunyan on "Turning Backs", an exquisitely orchestrated track she has
said was written with Nick Drake in mind, but that might also provide
insight into the reasons behind her long absence. Her frustration with the
domestic life also crops up on "Wayward", on which she describes "days going
by lost in clouds of flour and whitewashing," before later sighing, "I
wanted to be the one with road-dust on my boots."



Elsewhere, though, these songs look on the past with a shivery, almost
tangible longing. "Here Before", is an elegant ode to the happy mysteries of
parenthood ("Once I had a child/ He was wild in the moonlight/ He could do
it all/ Like he'd been here before") while on "Against the Sky" she depicts
a city-dweller nostalgic for her old farmstead ("The hill behind the old
house/ I can trace it with my finger.") For some listeners, such nostalgia
might teeter uncomfortably close to sentimentality, but even on personal
tracks such as the brief elegy "Brother", Bunyan keeps her touch impossibly
light, reflecting only for a moment before quickly turning another page.
Lookaftering closes with a wordless reprise of "Wayward", as she quietly
hums the song's melody as though unaware that anybody might be listening.
But, hopefully, with the arrival at last of her stunning second album,
Vashti Bunyan need no longer worry about her music going unheard.
